Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the Center.
I'm your host as always Ricardo
Loops. And today I'm joined by
Dr Mia
Massimi.
She is Professor of Philosophy of Science in the
Department of Philosophy at the University of Edinburgh,
affiliated with the Higgs Center for Theoretical Physics.
She works in the area of history and Philosophy
of Science with the focus on the physical sciences.
And today we are focusing on her book Perspective
of Realism, which by the way, just recently won the 2023 Lacas
awards. So
Dr
Massimi,
welcome to the show. It's a big pleasure to everyone.
Thank you so much for having me Ricardo
to be here.
OK. So to get into the book, I would like to start by asking you this.
So what is realism in science?
And by the way, uh when, when I mean, realism is, are there
different kinds of realism or not?
Sure. Yeah. So um
what we call realism in philosophy of science is really um a broad um family of views
um that normally are characterized by um series of commitments
um
that um are distinctive of what we would like to think of a realist position.
Now,
uh what those commitments are obviously um
are fairly well understood, but also change
in a very subtle way depending on
which specific variety of realism one is willing to subscribe to.
Um So I would say that what defines realism are two main
commitments.
Uh One is the idea that there is uh uh uh uh
some
relationship between science and
um nature
that is usually captured by the notion of truth.
Um And the other is that there has to be some
kind of representational relation between how science and scientific theory,
scientific models
relate
to the target system.
So if you ask me,
I would say um realism is defined by
those two broad notions of truth and representation.
Now, obviously, we may disagree about what we mean by truth.
We may disagree slightly about what we mean by
representation, how models represent reality.
Um So, depending on how
different philosophers characterize those notions,
you may get different varieties of realism.
Um So, over really the past uh 40 50 years,
there has been a proliferation of views that
call themselves or style themselves as realist view.
Um Some of them are um redefining some of those notions of truth.
So you have variety of pragmatic realism or internal realism.
Um Others are rethinking the exact nature
of the relationship between science and nature um
uh in terms of representation.
So you have varieties of selective realism, for example, that
um endorse the presentational commitment,
but they would be selective about which aspects of reality
the model is committed to represent.
So very broadly, truth and representation are the two key commitments.
Uh And within the broad umbrella, there is a, a
full spectrum of views that may slightly
differ in how they understand those two notions
and how those two notions enter into
um our way of thinking about science and, and reality
and related to that, what would an anti realist stance in science entail?
So, um
going back to this idea that, you know,
truth and representations are some of the two key commitments.
Um
uh anti realist view
views and plural can be characterized by
uh playing down some of those um notions.
So for example, you find the varieties of instrumentalist views,
they are anti realist views because they are not committed to the notion that
um
uh truth is any important element in the way in
which we think about the relation between science and reality.
Um
You get varieties of constructivism
um that likewise
uh would challenge the idea that uh representation really
plays an important role in how models latch onto,
onto the world on the realities.
Um So there's a broad spectrum of views really
going back to um 1980 the scientific image of Basman
Pras.
And
um that has been a landmark book for a constructive empiricism.
Um It's a classic example of an anterial
view where
um the notion of truth is replaced by notion of empirical adequacy, for example.
So according to a
fra
and die of
science is not to deliver
um
theories, they are approximately true but to deliver theories, they are pi
adequate.
Um two more recently varieties of epistemological constructivism.
So, um Mike Boone
um building on the process and defense form a form of constructivism and
um how she conceptualizes the relationship between models and reality.
Um
So this is just an example, but obviously the family is much broader than that.
And what is a scientific perspective?
Um
So it's a great question, what is STV perspective?
So the term um has a bit of an history.
Um The way I've been using it in my book um really has a um a predecessor.
The closest predecessor
is in
Ron's uh book on scientific perspective is
uh the way Ron
Giri originally defined the notion of a scientific perspective was really
in analogy uh with Thomas Coon's notion of a disciplinary matrix.
So disciplinary matrix is a um
a slightly more refined notion of uh probably
the more familiar notion of S and TV paradigm
um
in the sense that it indicates uh a family of um practices
and commitments that particular community has at a particular historical time.
The way in which
Rangiri originally defined the Oslo
scientific perspective in, in, in the book
was really in terms of families or models. So Rangiri
was building on a long standing tradition, going back to Patrick Sap
in the 19 sixties onwards,
um
whereby uh we need to think of scientific theories as, as families or models.
Uh starting with high level models,
uh representational models, going all the way down to
um models of the experiment, data model and so forth.
What I do in the book is to slightly move away from
Maroni's definition.
Um Because I would like to think of a scientific
perspective as something broader than just the family of models.
So for me,
a scientific perspective is the historically and
culturally situated practice of particular communities,
a particular historical time.
And I understand really this notion of practice in a very, very broad sense um
um
to include varieties of knowledge that
um may not necessarily have well defined formalized modeling practices.
Um
So broadly speaking, a scientific perspective is a,
is a historically situated practice of a community.
And um here I borrow on the literature in epistemology.
Um there's been again, a very important literature on perspective is coming from
epistemology and
Aaron Sosa in particular
knowledge in perspective uh book
uh from which I'm drawing in thinking that really what
SN TV perspective does is not just to um advance
um a series of claims of knowledge,
but also provide the um experimental theoretical and
technological tools for reliably making those claims of knowledge
as well as providing um
methodological and epistemic principles that can justify the reliability of um
of our uh uh uh
uh practices for making those claims of knowledge. So it's kind of a a
three fold distinction between the body of claims of knowledge,
the experimental theoretical conceptual tools to reliably make them
and the methodological epistemic principle that justify the
reliability of those uh of those tools.
And that's the, the, the very broad way in which I've been using the term in the book.
And what about a perspective
of
realism? What does it mean exactly? And what flavor of realism applies to it?
So, um
yeah, that's a great question.
Going back to the original question about
varieties of realism and family of realism.
Um
I'd like to think of prospect
our realism as a view that is committed to
the notion of truth as correspondence and the idea that
um our theories, our models especially uh represent reality.
So it's a realist view.
But the way I present the view in the book is that it, it's not a metaphysics first
uh view about realism. So very often
what you find is that realism is defined by
uh metaphysics first approaches. So if someone declared themselves a realist,
what they really mean is that they are committed to
spelling out to what the metaphysical building blocks of nature are
or they are committed to
um tell a story about uh what the metaphysical foundations of reality are.
And the metaphysical story typically involves
um
different flavors of metaphysics.
So some people are committed to natural properties others are committed to
the
there are dispositions
um
or other people believe in causal powers.
Um
per
the
realism is not
a metaphysics first approach in the sense
that although there is a metaphysical part,
uh which is the second part of the book, um the primary aim is really um
trying to uh
uh in a way show how that metaphysical
commitment is really downstream to an epistemological project.
So what really matters to me is to
trying to understand how we produce reliable knowledge
over time and how a plurality of historical and cultural situated perspectives
um
are able to uh deliver that reliable knowledge over time.
So um I see realism not so much as uh
um an exercise in trying to
uh unveil the metaphysical building block of nature, but I see metaphysics as the
downstream outcome of how we tell a story
about how we produce reliable knowledge over time.
So there is a metaphysical part. So ultimately, spec
of
realism is realism about phenomena about modally robust phenomenon.
And that obviously involves
really finding the very notion of phenomena that has a long philosophical history.
And it's, it's, it's part of what they're doing in the second part of the book.
So if you ask me, what kind of flavor is perspective, a
realism, it's really realism about moderate robust phenomena.
Um
But as I said, I see that metaphysical commitment as, as the outcome of
uh um uh a
more important exercise, which is trying to understand how
um different communities over time and
culture produce reliable knowledge over time.
But then where is, where exactly is the perspective,
all nature in scientific representation?
So, yeah,
what that perspective is enters into the
story of how we produce reliable knowledge,
right?
So um
I can think of a plurality of
communities that are historical and cultural situated,
different historical periods, different cultures and so forth.
Can we tell a story about
how that knowledge is produced a across these different communities?
And how is that story going to look like?
Um So one thing I definitely wanted to do in the book is to avoid any
um standard template that you find in the literature
on realism about realism of being some kind of convergence
to a reality that um in a way we all agree upon.
Um There is no convergence in perspective of realism.
Um The way I use often this metaphor in the book taken for
um
the, the
o
Borges at the Garden of Forking Path, they
are
uh producing knowledge is a bit like going through a
garden of forking path and kind of zigzagging where at each
juncture, we have to make a choice about which path we want to go down. So there is no
uh or underlying picture, the realism is a convergence to
because really it's a realism about phenomena,
there's no realism about any fundamental metaphysical reality, as I said,
the cause of powers, dispositional essence is that we want to call it.
Um
So those phenomena are encountered by different
communities across different periods and across different cultures
um in a reliable way or in a way that we are able to
uh uh to see how their situated practices intersect with one another.
So this is where the perspective that comes in, right? Because traditionally,
um
the very idea that the starting point of conversations about realism
is, is, is,
is is human beings in their plurality and historically and cultural situated, this
has appeared to be a stumbling block to any realist project.
How could one ever possibly defend realism, especially about science?
Once we take really seriously that
there is a plurality of um historically situated communities and their culture.
So that was the starting point of my um kind of journey uh for the book.
Um I went back to the notion of representation.
I said at the beginning through the representations are
the two key commitment of any realist view.
And I wanted to understand what makes some representations pers
respectable and whether there is a way of
reconciling the perspective of representation with realism.
Um So at the very beginning of the book,
I go back to the analogy between art and science
and that has been well explored since the time of,
well, it's a long story, long tradition really.
Uh but more recently, Basra
and 2008 book on a scientific representation,
paradoxes of perspectives has been a very influential
uh book for uh for my own personal journey,
but also Kathrine Elgin uh 2017 book.
Uh True Enough,
uh is also very important for
discussing the perspective nature of representation.
And so really thinking about the analogy between art and science,
what makes some representation perspect?
Traditionally, we tend to think of that uh
question in terms of
the representation is
situated is from a particular vantage point.
So um a drawing, a perspective drawing is what makes the drawing perspective
is that the scene is painted
from a particular angle.
And obviously,
the angle means that there are other aspects of the scene
that we can't really see uh from that particular angle.
So there is an element of lusion
and there is what Vansen
called
um a horizon of alternatives.
We could have chosen to represent the scene
from different angles and we could have chosen to
represent the object with different attributes.
Um
So the story I turn in chapter two and three of the book,
which is really the beginning of the of the book is
that very often that specific way of thinking about perspective of representation
um has been um
regarded as a as a, as a difficulty for any realism or a realist project.
Um
Precisely because if the representation is situated is from a particular angle,
how can we ever be in a position of saying what the
real nature of the object is, our knowledge is always partially occluded and,
and, and, and not complete.
Um So the story I tell is that, well, actually, if you look at the
nature of perspective and drawing in art,
um there are two ways of thinking about perspective,
um a representation is perspective,
not only because it's drawn from a particular angle, but because it's also
drawn towards one or more vantage point.
Actually, technically, this is the definition of a
perspect
uh representation that
um there is one or more
vantage point towards which lines converge.
And that's what creates the optical illusion that you can see a
three dimensional space on what effectively is a two dimensional canvas.
Um
And, and so I play with that metaphor in art to say, well, really,
those are two aspects of the same coin really, you know,
you the representation is perspect
as drawn from a particular vantage point only
in so far as there is one or more vantage points that allows us to create this,
this these windows of reality,
uh this, this three dimensional space emerging out of a two dimensional canvas.
And so that's my entry point for the idea that there is a way of
telling a story about realism
starting with the situated nature of the representation.
So tell us now about the notion of pluralism.
Where is it and how does it apply to science?
Yeah. So pluralism is really uh again, a big family
of views.
Uh I'm drawing really here on a long standing tradition that has emphasized
the importance of pluralism in science.
Um explanatory pluralism and methodological pluralism
uh tradition. Going back to Ellen Longino
and
uh Carol, a fair and Miriam Solomon and Sandra Mitchell, integrity, pluralism.
Obviously, John Dupre promiscuous
realism and many, many, many others.
Um the kind of pluralism
um
that matters to my story is again, perspect about pluralism is pluralism of
perspectives as I have defined it.
Uh So my emphasis is not so much
on um explanatory methodological or ontological pluralism.
It's really pluralism about
uh uh historically, cult
is the practices. It's, it's a fact that science is the outcome of this plurality of
perspectives and communities that have endorsed different practices.
Um
And then obviously, then the question becomes OK.
Um As I was just saying with the problem of perspective or representation is pers
sorry, representation from a point of view, representation
uh uh towards one or more vantage point,
the question is OK, if you take the pluralism as a fact about science,
what kind of uh realism
emerges out of that, can we even talk about realism
or should we just say that we are
um
confined to a plurality of um ways of knowing
they are distinctive of different communities and their practices?
Um
But we can't really attempt to tell a story about
science and scientific knowledge and,
and realism about science
and the best that we can do is this plurality of scientific practices.
So, what I do in the book is to say, no, no, no.
We, we can take the pluralism, perspect of pluralism as a starting point.
It's a fact about science. The science is produced in that way.
But that doesn't mean that we need to end up
with some kind of instrumentalist or anti realist view.
There's still a way of defending realism in science.
Um
starting with perspect about pluralism.
Mhm
And so another thing that you tackle in
your book is the problem of inconsistent model.
So what is that problem really about and can perspective is help us tackle it?
Yeah. So kind of zooming into uh this problem of how to reconcile
um Perspect about pluralism as pluralism of perspectives and, and realism.
The problem in consistent models uh is,
is, is one of, is one of the major problem for any perspective is
um
because this is where we the pluralism um
appears to be somehow at odds with any realist claim.
Um So it's a problem that was really brought to the general attention um
maybe 13 years ago uh roughly
uh by uh Mary Morrison um in a, in a beautiful paper where
she discusses the plurality of models in some areas of science. So she says,
well, look at nuclear physics, right?
Um So the areas of science where there is one model,
we all agree more or less that uh you know, it is the
um best model to describe some kind of phenomena.
But there are other areas where there seems to be a pluralism,
a kind of endemic pluralism and as, as pluralism of models.
So the example of Morrison is that
if you look at nuclear physics,
and if you ask the question about what is the atomic nucleus,
um
you find different answers to the question depending
on whether we are studying a nuclear fission.
In which case, we represent the nucleus as if it was a liquid
of incompressible nuclear fluid.
Uh But if we are studying um stellar nucleus synthesis,
we use different families of models,
the cluster model whereby the atomic nucleus is represented as a
tetrahedron
with a particular structures of problems and neutrons.
And obviously, if we're studying other phenomena in high energy physics,
we use yet another class of models.
We use the quark models to describe what happens when we smash protons to say at LHC.
So Morrison Point was, well, if we have this pluralism of models,
does it even make sense to ask
what is the atomic nucleus? I mean, w where is the realism there? Right? I mean,
we have different stories about what the nucleus is.
Um is there one which is the best one? And if, if there is, then what about the others?
Isn't it better to adopt some kind of instrumental is
um
perspective is,
has often been accused of being a form of instrumental is so um Morrison
uh argument in that paper that has also been
rested by other philosophers like
an
Chakravorti,
for example, in
um in, in, in, in,
in his book on um the the kind of
metaphysics of nature is that very often perspective is,
doesn't live up to the promise of realism because it looks like
uh what we really mean by perspective is is the
representation is drawn from a particular point of view.
So if you look at the nucleus from the point of view of um fission, then it looks like a
liquid drop. But if you look at the nucleus from the point of view of stellar
nucleus synthesis, then it looks like a tetrad.
And I think it's that way of thinking about perspective is that has really um
meant that perspective is for a long time as has
been regarded as kind of no much for realism.
Um So I tackled the problem of inconsistent models in chapter three of the book.
And um
I show that the problem is not really a problem for perspective
is in so far as we are clear about um some
hidden assumptions that seems to be creeping into the argument.
And so some of those
assumptions are
uh in my view are, are really um
kind of very demanding and unduly stringent
realist assumption that
seems to assume that models represent by mapping 1 to 1
aspects of the model with aspects of the target system.
And that seems to understand the notion
of truth going back to representation of truth
in terms of uh truth maker.
So there has to be a ontological state of
affairs in terms of ascription of essential properties to particular
that make some claims of knowledge true.
And now if one endorses that view about truth,
the truth makers and representation as mapping,
I think Morrison has a point that this plurality of model seems to be a problem for,
for realism,
we can't think of the nucleus as
having inconsistent or incompatible essential properties.
Um
But what I do in chapter three of the book is to resist
that assumption and saying,
uh why,
why do we need to buy into representation as mapping or
what do we need to buy into truth as truth maker?
Maybe there is a different way of thinking about
what models do and how they represent from a perspective
or point of view that doesn't necessarily land us into this
um uh quo
of inconsistent essential properties ascribed to the same target system.
And so it's a very important problem because it's really um
the starting point of a way of reconciling realism or perspective is
and uh related to perspective
modeling and perspective of models. Um
What do you mean by them being blueprints on reality as you say in the book?
And uh perhaps related to these,
how do the concepts of conceivability and possibility enter into it.
Yeah. So
um what I do from chapter four or five onwards is to spell out the positive story,
right?
And not just to say,
we need to resist all this assumption and duly stringent assumption. So
um a different way of thinking about what models do
is to tell a different story about how to represent
their target system without ascribing essential properties to the target system.
So in that context that develop the
view that models really are inferential blueprints,
so they are blueprints that allows different communities.
And again, think of a plurality
of historical and cultural situated communities to draw inferences
about relevant model, robust phenomena from a plurality of data set.
So what the model does is not so much
mapping 1 to 1 aspects of the model and aspects of reality. I think we have been
very often in philosophy, science, we have this picture that models represent.
But as if
really the primary function of the model was to
mirror a map onto the target system, right?
But that idea seems very counterintuitive to me even I mean,
think of well established model like the DN model of the nucleus, right.
I mean, we don't,
we don't use the model because we want to necessarily represent the nucleus,
we use the model because we want to make inferences right about the
that we want to study, we want to understand how DNA behaves,
we want to understand how
uh possible error in the um in the in the process of DNA
uh
chain of events may happen.
So we,
we want to ask those questions about what is possible
about DNA replication and mistakes in the DNA replication.
So think of models really as catering to this needs of allowing us to make
uh uh relevant and appropriate inferences about phenomena that we want to study.
So that's what the metaphor of inferential blueprint is.
So models yes, do represent and do represent from a specific vantage point.
That's why we have a plurality of models used by different communities.
The primary function is not to ascribe essential properties to the target system.
As the metaphysicians would like us to think of
the primary function is to allow communities to make reliable, robust,
relevant and appropriate inferences about those uh uh those phenomena that, that,
that we want to study.
And so again, I use the analogy very often as I do in the book between um
uh uh uh perspective
of representation in this case in architecture.
So the idea of the inferential blueprints is borrowed from,
from architecture because again, in, in, in, in architecture, you can have uh
um a plurality of perspective
or representation of say a house that allows different communities of the
carpenter and the masons and the architects to work together and
make inferences about how the house should be built. How tall should the roof be?
What's the relationship between the height of the
door and the height of the roof.
Uh And so I use an analogy to say likewise,
whenever we want to study specific phenomenon,
that plurality of models allows these different communities to make those
uh uh relevant and appropriate inferences about the
objects so that we want to study.
Um So they find in models as really catering to um
the need of delivering knowledge about what
is possible about the object under study.
So, perspect
modeling is modeling possibilities, modeling, how things could be.
Um
And it's,
it's a way of answering those questions in
a kind of very exploratory way where we have
not just one community that can reclaim full
ownership of the knowledge of the target system,
but we need a plurality of communities
that I illustrate with various case studies in the book.
So I have one chapter on climate change.
So climate modeling in the context of studying um
uh global warming, one chapter on
developmental psychology
and one chapter on the nuclear physics where I show how in each case
to study specific phenomena like the stability
of some nuclear or difficulties with reading
or
global warming.
We need a plurality of community.
So if you want to study climate change and global warming,
you need a plurality of people that model um increase in ocean heat temperature
uh communities that model how glacier and permafrost
are changing under the effect of greenhouse gasses.
Communities that study corals and uh uh
tree rings. So then
thema
again to make inferences from those data to the phenomena under study.
And so it's through that plurality of modeling practices and,
and communities that we come to know
very complex and multifactorial phenomena like
um
global warming, for example.
So that that's how I use the analogy with
models as inferential blueprint to explain our models.
Yes, represent, yes, represent from a perspect
point of view.
But they do so by effectively delivering knowledge about what
is possible concerning the object that we want to study.
So earlier in our conversation, you alluded to this.
Uh But what are they, what are phenomena and what is the relationship between them
through this framework of perspective of realism?
Yeah. So um going back to uh
exactly the question of what flavor of realism is basically our realism,
as I mentioned in the beginning, it's really a realism about phenomena.
But I, one of the main task of the book was to redefine what I mean by phenomenon.
This phenomena come from a
long standing empi
traditions that really stretches back to,
you know, pm 19 05, a
wonderful book on to save the phenomenon more recently, wasn't to
Pras
and I mentioned already in 1980 scientific image.
Um that also defends the view that um you know,
the reality is reality made of phenomena observable phenomena according to Tora.
Um
So it's very difficult to say that I'm a realist
about phenomena when the very term phenomenon has been associated
with uh a long standing and pis
tradition that is normally regarded phenomena is
not the sort of objects that one would have real
and commitment to.
Um
So what I do in the second part of the book is trying to um
articulate the positive story
and the positive story is that
um given this perspect
of pluralism,
uh where models are embedded as part of the practices of different communities,
the inferences that we make are inferences to what I call
moly robust phenomena. So what are moly robust phenomena?
They're not the phenomena of the
fro
and they're not the phenomenal of Pierre
do m they're not the phenomena of
the Empire
tradition as
um faint copies or faint images of a
reality
uh that lies underneath the phenomenon that we need to discover uh you know,
appealing to the metaphysician tools or
whatever dispositional essences or because of powers
uh phenomena of what there is in a way I'm
um borrowing from the country and tradition,
the idea that knowledge is knowledge of phenomena, but those phenomena not
in pieces, phenomena more
robust.
And what I really mean by more of robustness
is that
phenomena stable event.
So there's a kind of 22 tier ontology that I articulate in chapter six of the book.
So phenomena are stable event index to a particular domain
and they are modally robust across a plurality of
data to phenomena inferences.
So there are stable events in that, that there is a
level of reality that are called stable event where
stability is really synonymous with low likeness for me.
So
um stable events are events that are such not because they are core ones,
but because there are low like dependencies in
in the fabric of those events. So that explain why they are stable.
But the phenomenon is not just a stable event. Uh The phenomenon
is the outcome of an inference made by
communities from data understood broadly as empirical occurrences.
So to give an example that I um given the book,
um
it is a stable event that an electric charge is gonna be affected by
an electric or magnetic field.
So there are low like dependencies that explains how an electric
charge is going to be deflected by an external field,
that's a stable event in nature.
But
what we called um cathode
ray
or the phenomenon of the bending of cathode
rays is the model robust phenomenon that uh was discovered by
JJ Thompson at the end of the 19th century using a a
particular
tool that was a cato
tube working in a particular historically
cap
situated context. There was the Victorian Cambridge of the end of the century.
Um
And, and so
the phenomenon is not a robust because we can infer and
Reiner
um
the same phenomenon from different kind of data
sets by slightly tweaking the experimental conditions.
Uh And and so forth.
So the model of robustness is some kind
of secondary property that is really a property
of how different communities are able to robustly
infer the same phenomenon from a variety of,
of data.
So that's broadly speaking, the kind of phenomena for so
that I I defend in, in the book
and with that in mind, what are natural kinds and how do we go from phenomena to kinds?
So yeah, Um
so,
one of the problem I had when I was writing the book
is that I was obviously committed to defending this phenomenon for so,
but I was also
very much aware that when it comes to realism,
um it's not enough to say that we live in a world where there are moli
robust phenomena, the bending of the cat
race,
the decay of the Higgs boson,
the growth of the
mycelium echolocation in Beluga. Those are examples of what I call moli
robust phenomena, the pollination of flowers and so forth that
require inferences on behalf of communities to stable events in nature.
A realist wants uh something more than phenomena.
A realist want something about natural kinds. So a realist would say,
um
I don't just want to know what the bending of cadore
is. I want to know what the electron is. I want to know what the nucleus is.
I want to know what genes are.
I want to know, you know um what lemon and zebras and supernovas. Are
so those are natural kinds.
So those are
uh kinds of things.
And um again, realism very often has been associated with um
number of views about what national kinds are. Um
ranging from hacking. And no,
to I mentioned already, John Dupre promiscuous realism to
varieties of uh uh um microstructure and essentialism back to Hillary
Patnam in the 19 seventies and so forth.
Um So the story I tell in the book about natural kinds, which really a long one,
it stands from chapter seven to chapter 10 in the book
is that natural kinds are open ended
grouping of historically identified phenomena.
There is nothing more, nothing over
uh natural kinds than open ended grouping of historical identified phenomena.
And obviously, the big challenge is OK, is this just a form of conventional, is
a natural kind, just the label that we attach to grouping of phenomena.
So I had to go into um quite a lot
of details to clarify why the view is not a conventional
view. And it's not an essentialist view either.
Um But it's really a view that tries to
again bring in the inferential is so phenomena,
the outcome of inferences likewise natural kinds are the outcome of inferences.
Um Rob
robust, reliable, still revis
still open ended,
still very valuable inferences made by plurality of communities over time.
Um And so I'll give a full definition,
I give a full inferential story uh about national kind.
They are called natural kinds with the human face.
Borrowing from Hillary but
1990 book realism with a human face.
Um What I explain how those law
like dependencies in the fabric of the stable events provide effectively the
um
I I if you like the the kind of pointers in this walking in the garden of working path
in whereby communities can make
uh choices about
what to cluster or what not to cluster into the natural kind.
But to do so reliably, they need to rely on
low
like dependencies. They are part of the stable events in nature.
So the clustering is not arbitrary, it is not conventional.
And so there is an element of contingencies,
but it's not a rampant kind of contingentism.
It's, it's kind of constrained and guided by
um low
like dependencies in nature.
So it's a long story
from chapter seven to chapter 10. And I give a
full detail of that in, in, in,
in chapter 10 of the book where I delve
into the historical case studies about the electron.
And
yeah, sorry.
No, no, no worries.
Uh And another thing I would like to ask you is at a certain point in the book,
you talk about contingentism.
So what is contingentism and how is it involved in perspective of
realism?
So continent
is, is associated precisely with
um
with this point I was making about how the um open ended grouping of phenomena
is to some extent contingent in the sense that we
could have cluster different phenomena under the National Kind Electron,
for example,
um now continent,
this historically has been a very powerful uh argument
coming from the history of science against a very strong
um the physical form of realism.
Um
um So,
I don't know lots of people that contributed to this debate from has
Chang to cons
for them.
Also Joseph Laporte.
Um so things could have gone otherwise, right?
So Joseph Laporte, in his book on Natural Con and con
change, tell us it is a beautiful story of how,
you know, we made a choice at some point to include the dirty
oxide into
um the natural kind water.
But there was a choice in a way that we made, we could have,
we could have gone otherwise.
So that's the element of contingentism.
Uh I define a particular brand of contingentism in the sense that um
um um I'm not that kind of full blown contingent is in the sense that
I don't think that things could have gone entirely in a completely different way.
Uh Precisely because um the way I think a phenomena
as a stable event where stability is synonymous with low likeness
means that the inferences that communities make about what phenomena goes with.
What other phenomena
are not fully at our
discretion,
are not fully at our women in a way we need
to respond to the Tribunal of Nature as a speaker,
I find.
So um There are a lot like dependencies
that really guides those inferences that we make.
Um So, uh
uh and uh and so I tell a story about how um
every natural kind is a kind in the making.
Uh some of those in the making kind become empty at some point when we discovered that
maybe there's some violation of fundamental laws.
Uh So we believed in caloric, for example, back in the 19th century,
people believed that there was a substance called caloric that was responsible for
transitional state from ice to say water to, to steam.
Um But some of the uh inferences that people made
about what are the phenomena that are captured by the Nashua
Khan Caloric
uh were clearly inferences that very soon revealed their limits.
So um reveal their limits because
very often they were appealing to um features
of the phenomena that were simply false.
So, Sadiq
Karno was one of the
um
key people in the
uh formulation of the KO
principles and the car
cycle. So Ko
believed in caloric
back in the first half of the 19th century.
And he believed that there was a substance that
was uh uh physically conserved whenever a hot reservoir
goes into cold reservoir. And then a new cycle starts behind like a steam engine.
Uh but obviously, there is no conserve calor
and there is no conservation of caloric and there
is no perpetual motion machine and in fact,
can be created using that principle.
So this is where we face the tribunal of experience where we can't say
we could have had
now in 2023 an Act
kind caloric
still alive.
And well, no, we couldn't have had that right,
because we soon stumbled into some problems about
some of those very phenomena that were identified,
identified as the phenomenon where caloric was,
was at work.
And uh and the fact that there was no
conservation of caloric and if anything there was dissipation,
which was then captured by the concept of entropy and so forth
revealed the limits of those associations.
So, so kind of long winded answer to your question, the contingentism means
that although things could have gone otherwise in how communities
came to make inferences about phenomenon connection between phenomena,
things could not have gone entirely
in a completely different ways because in a way, there are those constraints
concerning low
like dependencies of the phenomena that
uh really act as pointers in the garden of working path about which inferences
we decide to
go down to and which inferences we decide to abandon at some point.
-- I
-- understand.
So getting into the last part of our interview,
could you tell us now about multiculturalism and cosmo
cosmopolitanism? Science? I mean,
uh is science a multicultural and cosmopolitan enterprise?
And what role do these two things? Multiculturalism and cosmopolitan,
cosmopolitanism play in science?
Yeah. No, thank you. So this is the final chapter of the book and it's um
um
I wanted to write that chapter because um
I,
I thought the book was going to be
complete without a final discussion about what really
um questions about realism and perspective
iss
uh
are doing in, in this context.
Um So very often in the debate on realism,
philosophers have appealed to the aims of science.
So it seems that, you know, we care about discussion about realism and the
realism and
truth and representation because
we want to
fundamentally um
answer questions about
what is the goal of science and what is the aim?
Um
And I thought that
perspective of realism was not really
answering that question about what the aim of goal of science is.
Uh what perspective of realism does is to um
offer a different lens for thinking about
realism in science, starting with this plurality of situated communities.
And once you take that step,
the next step is to think of questions about
duties and obligations in science and rights in science. So no questions,
aims and goals. But actually
what is science for who produces science?
Who has to benefit from science, who can reclaim as their own
a right to benefit from scientific knowledge.
So the
first chapter in a way, try to answer those, those questions which are kind of more
um
ethical political questions about duties and obligations in science. So,
multiculturalism and cosmopolitanism are again huge terms with a very long
and often difficult and vexed history that I wanted to use to
um exactly explain
they, they called the
natural
perspective of realism.
Though it's,
there's a perspective of pluralism that like there's multiculturalism,
there's this plurality of
historically situated communities that over
time produce reliable knowledge about more
robust phenomena.
But also an invitation of not thinking about
that situated nature of knowledge as some kind of
silo where knowledge is produced by community
in isolation from other communities. Or
you know, this is the um kind of picture that we had again from, you know,
the the tradition of
a
Thomas K
on scientific paradigms where there is incommensurability.
Um There's a period of crisis and scientific revolution.
Uh And I,
I wanted to offer a different story where it was
really an invitation of not to think of scientific perspectives as
siloed.
Uh but to think of those communities and their
interaction in terms of what I call intersecting and interlacing
scientific perspectives,
perspectives that over time,
not only methodological intersect to allow us to make more
reliable inferences about the phenomenon that we want to study.
But also over time, historically interlace like the um
like in a fabric,
like in a piece of cloth where you
have the different threads that are historically interlaced
uh to produce knowledge that effectively is knowledge that we can reclaim as, as,
as knowledge that belong
to all of us. And obviously
that open up also the question questions about when is the interlacing virtues?
When is the interlacing going badly wrong? Because there are exploitative
practices or epistemic injustices in the way in which some communities
appropriate other communities types of knowledge. So whose knowledge is it?
Who, who can be
uh uh uh attributed authorship of particular uh knowledge claims?
So those are all very big questions that I try to simply really
map out in the final chapter and I hope to get back to.
But the idea is that starting with
this perspective of pluralism and multiculturalism,
we can articulate a picture about scientific knowledge as reliable knowledge
uh that has to address important epistemic injustice about
what I call the severing and trademarking of knowledge.
And at the same time,
has to result in a broader picture of how knowledge is really knowledge produced
by uh uh by humankind for humankind. So that no one should be excluded from
benefiting
from it and benefiting from the advances of scientific knowledge.
So it kind of branches out into debates about the
uh right to science as a uh as a right
that is enshrined in the UN Declaration of Human rights.
So everyone
is
uh should benefit from um scientific progress and scientific advancement,
but it's obviously not what happens in practice.
The scientific knowledge continues to be privatized,
continues to be in the hands of um
few wealthy countries.
So um as I said it as a final chapter that um I
hope to get back to in terms of my present and future work.
But it kind of shows the broader
um
kind of social
political dimensions in which discussions about pluralism
and perspective is and realism play out.
And so my final question for today will be,
is science really about producing objective knowledge
or knowing what objective reality is?
Yes, is the answer in so far as we are clear about what we mean by objective reality,
right?
So
uh if objective reality means that there is one way
and one way only to uh carving natural disjoint,
I mean, that's not what perspective of realism
would subscribe to.
Uh but by objective reality, we mean that there is a world of stable events,
Koli events
uh to which our uh multifarious inferential practices have to respond.
That's, that's objective enough.
And so, yes, scientific knowledge,
knowledge of objective reality within the bounds of
uh the
historical and cultural situated
practices
that we have, we don't have any God's eye view, we don't have any view from nowhere.
But that doesn't mean that what we have is just um a
fragmented landscape of isolated
communities. What we have is a fairly remarkable
uh knowledge produced over time by different communities.
And I think it's something that
uh I wanted to celebrate in, in, in the book.
And uh as I said, it kind of opens up broader questions about
um who produces knowledge and who should benefit from knowledge that
is entangled in my mind with these questions about objective reality.
Mhm.
Great.
So uh I'm leaving a link to the book in the description box of the interview,
which is again, perspective of
realism.
Uh Doctor Massimi, just before we go,
would you like to tell people where they can find you and your work on the internet?
Um So I have my website which is www dot
mila
mastery
dot com.
So, um uh um that's where
my um articles and books and activities and projects normally are, are posted.
Mhm.
Yeah.
So thank you so much again for taking the time to come on the show.
It's been a real pleasure to talk to you.
My pleasure. Thank you so much for having me.
Hi guys. Thank you so much for watching the interview until the end.
Please share it,
leave a like comment and hit the subscription button and if
you like what I'm doing and to keep the channel sustainable,
please consider supporting it on Patreon or paypal even
just $1 per month is already a great help.
The show is brought to you by N Lights learning and development.
Then differently check their website at N lights dot com.
I would also like to give a huge thank you to my main patrons and paypal supporters
bugger
Larson, Jerry Mueller and Frederick Sunda,
Bernard,
Se
Z OLA
AEX,
Adam, Castle Matthew Whittenberg,
Arno
Wolf, Tim Hoy,
Eric, Alan
John Connors Philip for
Connolly. Then the
Mere Robert Wine in
NAI
Z
Mar
Nevs Colin Ha
Simon Columbus, Phil
Kavanagh,
Mikel Stormer,
Samuel Andre
Francis for
the
nuns
feral
Ken
Hal Herzog.
Nun
Jonathan
lebron
Jars
and
Samuel
Correa Eric Heinz Marc Smith J
Tom
Hamel
S
Friends, David
Sloan Wilson, Yasa,
Desario, Roman
Roach Diego,
Romani
Charlotte Bli
Nicole Barbaro, Adam hunt Palos
stas
Sy
Nale
Bach Guy Madison, Gary Gelman, Samo
Zal
Adrian Yi
Paul
Tolentino JB
was
Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Brunner, Douglas Fry Franco Bertolotti,
Gabriel Pan
Cortez
Orli
Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sunny Smith, John
Wiesman,
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgino,
Luke Lo
A
Georges, the
Chris Williams and Peter Woz.
David Williams the
Costa Anton Erickson Charles More
Aex
Shaw,
Amari, Martinez, Coralie
Chevalier,
bangalore
atheists, Larry D Lee Junior
Old Aring B
Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur
Robert Grassy.
Zorin
Jeff mcmahon, Jake
Zul
Barnabas. Radis
Mark Campbell Thomas Dubner, Luke Neeson, Chris story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Gilbert Jessica Nowicki,
Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensley
Man.
George Coryat
is Valentin Steinman,
Per
Rowley
Kate Von Goler, Alexander Hubbard,
Liam Dunaway Biard
Masoud
Ali Mohammadi
and Perpendicular. A special thanks to my producers is our web, Jim Frank Luca Stefi
Thomas
Tom
Ween,
Bernard
Nic
Ortiz Dixon Benedict Mueller Thomas Trumble,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin John Carlo Montenegro, Al
Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden.
And to my executive producers Matthew Lavender, Sergio
Riano Bogdan
Knits
and Vege
G. Thank you for all.